Nas  Installation, setup and configuration.

This enables multiple servers in IDC to share the same storage for backup at once, which minimizes overhead by centrally managing hard disks. NAS is scalable, high performance network setusolution. The main advantage is more hard disk storage space added to a network that already utilizes servers without shutting them down for maintenance and upgrades.

Network attached storage.
SAN ( Storage area network)
NAS and SAN are called external centralized storage.
Lun (logical unit number ) is an address attached to a specified NAS or SAN storage
NAS or SAN admin create luns 
And unix admin use luns they attached luns to the server to create virtual drives that can be sliced and used as desired.
SAN /NAS are system with a lot of storage
Ie numerous array of hard drives put together to form a hurge storage system.
The difference between a NAS and a SAN is that NAS is a more smaller version of SAN 
Some popular OS for SAN and NAS 
EMC
FREENAS 9it is an open source os build on unix kernel.
We will install and configure FREENAS
Create LUNS from the NASstorage
Attach the lun to our solaris server to create virtual drives 
We can use the drive to create 
Setup and installation

Create a vm 
RAM = 1400
One storage of 2g  for the NAS os 
One storage of 10 gb  for LUNS
Brigde it 
Import the FREENAS software 
Boot up to start the installation of NAS.
Select install upgrade
Then select the 2g 
After the installation, remove the dvd and reboot 
It will pick an ip upon reboot and if it doesn’t,

Press 1 to configure one 
Select em0 as NIC
No for configure network
No for DHCP
Yes for configure ipv4 
Put the ip address you choose
No for ipv4
To configute the lun,
You need to go to the browser.
http://yourip (ip for NAS)
it will display the NAS UI 

create a volume on the NAS 
clic on storage on the left , clic on volume , ufs volume manager 
in the volume name box assign a volume name highlight the 10g or the volume correspondant and click add volume now click on view volume to see your new volume.
Create an iscsi LUN from the volume 
Click on the service tab 
Turn on scsi and click on the settings icon and click on portals (this will setup access to the LUN from external system)
Click on add portal (portal1) 
In comment , select the NAS ip address from the pull down menu
Then click on initiator tab then add initiator leave it all and click ok
We don’t touch authorized access then we click on target , add target 
Target name = target1 
Portal group id select and hit ok
Then clic on extend and give it a name (entend1)
Attach volume to extend by clicking browse to the extend box.
Select the path to volume 
Eg /mnt/vol1/nas1 and add size to the lun in the extend size box
Associated target (link the target to the lun) click associated target ,add target/extend select from the pull down and click ok

Server site (attach the lun to the server.)
Ping the NAS
Check the drives we have already
then attach the luns to the server 
#yum -y install iscsi-initiator-utils

#iscsiadm -m discovery -t st -p 192.168.1.141

m = mode
 t= target 
st= sendtarget
 p= portal

#iscsiadm -m node -T  iqn.2006-01.com.openfiler:tsn.d625a0d9cb77  -p 192.168.1.141 -l

m= mode T= target p= portal l= logon
you can now check and see the new drive 
#ls /dev/sd*

